[Music]
thank you
welcome to the waking up Podcast this is
Sam Harris
okay it's been a week since the election
happily I won't be saying anything about
it today
there will be an upcoming podcast or two
where I'll get into politics again I'm
sure
you will not be spared
I have some interesting guests coming up
in the next few weeks however I've got
Stuart Russell a computer scientist at
Berkeley
he'll be on to discuss artificial
intelligence
many people who have publicly worried
about the risks of AI people like
Stephen Hawking and Max tegmark and Elon
Musk and Nick Bostrom are often
dismissed by people in the field because
they aren't computer scientists
themselves
well you can't do that with Stuart he is
a computer scientist and he actually
wrote the most influential textbook on
AI so
he seems like the perfect person to tell
me whether I went overboard in my Ted
Talk on the topic
so I'm looking forward to that
I'll also have
Shady Hamid on the podcast to talk about
his book Islamic exceptionalism
he's a senior fellow at Brookins who
takes a slightly different line than
Majid and I have taken on the topic of
Islam and secularism
the psychologist Paul Bloom is coming
back to talk about empathy
and why it's not as good as you think
I'm also hoping to have the audio from
my public events with Richard Dawkins
eventually
so there's some good conversations
coming up
today I'll be speaking with the
physicist David Deutsch once again about
the foundations of morality and this
podcast came about in a slightly unusual
way
since we did our first podcast David
read my book the moral landscape
and he wanted to talk to me about it and
he wanted to do this privately I think
because there were some fundamental
things he disagreed with and he didn't
want to break the news to me on my own
podcast
but I urged him to let me record the
conversation so that we could release it
if we wanted to because if he was going
to dismantle my cherished thesis I
actually wanted you all to hear that
I also want you to hear anything else he
had to say because he's just so
interesting
the problem however is that I ran into
some equipment issues at the time and
could only record the raw Skype call so
the audio leaves a lot to be desired
and David's audio is actually better
than mine so it actually sounds like I'm
on his podcast
and because we weren't totally clear
that we were doing a podcast there were
parts of the conversation that needed to
be cut out and these Cuts leave the
resulting Exchange
slightly free associative
we put in a few music cues to Signal
those cuts in any case
David is such an interesting person
and many of you are I know are
interested in the thesis I put forward
in the moral landscape
so I decided the best thing to do is
release the recording warts and all
I certainly hope to have David back on
the podcast again but I doubt we'll
cover this territory again or cover it
in the same way so that is why I'm
bringing you this conversation now
so one major caveat however is that I
don't recommend you listen to this
podcast without first listening to my
first conversation with David episode 22
entitled surviving the cosmos
because we really just hit the ground
running here and if you're not familiar
with David
or his way of thinking about knowledge
and creativity you really might get lost
or at least you won't appreciate how
interesting some of his seemingly
prosaic comments are
David Deutsch is a physicist at Oxford
he is best known as the founding father
of quantum computation and for his work
on the Multiverse interpretation of
quantum mechanics
his main area of focus is now something
he is called Constructor Theory where
he's developing a new way to connect
information and knowledge to the
language of physics
and as with our last podcast the irony
is we don't discuss any of these things
though his views about knowledge and the
implications of its being independent of
Any Given physical embodiment the fact
that you can have the same information
in a molecule of DNA or on a computer
disk or chiseled into a piece of granite
this problem of understanding the the
substrate independence of information
and knowledge in the context of a
physical world
that is occasionally working in the
background
and it's one of the things that makes
David's take on more ordinary questions
so interesting
for instance his view about something as
pedestrian as why it's wrong to coerce
people to do things connects directly to
his view about what it means for
knowledge to accumulate in the physical
universe and the error correcting
mechanisms that allow it to accumulate
and if you're not familiar with the way
David thinks many of his statements will
probably just blow by you without your
realizing that something fairly
revolutionary has just been said
so again
please listen to that first podcast if
you haven't and then maybe listen to it
again
and you should read his book The
Beginning of infinity if you want to get
more deeply into his ideas
and now I bring you David Deutsch
[Music]
knowledge is basically
um critical and so this is actually the
connection with what I want to say about
your your books and that um the
foundational idea of knowledge that
traditionally uh the idea of knowledge
has been that we build it up we build it
up you know either from nothing like
Descartes or from from the senses or
from God or what have you or from our
genes and thinking
consists of
building break upon brick and from our
senses of course
um and but
um papa's View and which which of
science which which I want to extend to
all thinking and all ideas is that our
knowledge isn't like that it it consists
of a great slew of
not very consistent ideas
uh and and thinking consists of
wandering about in this slew trying to
make consistent the the ideas that seem
to be most worst offenders of being
inconsistent with each other by by
modifying them and we modify them just
by conjecture we we guess that something
might
cure the the various inconsistencies we
see and if it does then we move to that
and to get your book
I I'm I'm interested to see what you
think of this take on your book
um
we're so coming from the same place in
some respects and so coming from
opposite incompatible places in other
respects that it's hard to even
Express to each other what we mean
exactly and we've just just I think the
reason correct me if I'm wrong or if I'm
if I'm if I'm seeing this entirely the
wrong way I think the reason you
developed
a theory of morality and and took the
trouble to write this book about it
is is not an intellectual reason it's or
at least not primarily intellectual it's
not that you wanted to tweak the best
existing theories and and improve them
or to contradict some some prevalent
erroneous theories because
there are a lot of true and false
theories out there and and usually we
don't write about them we know life is
too short so I think the the the reason
you wrote this particular book and
developed this particular Theory
as I said it's not intellectual it's for
a particular purpose in the
um in the world namely
um
to to defend civilization
grandiose term yeah to defend it against
um it's not really too much hyperbole to
say
it's an existential Danger
from or two existential dangers one is
moral relativism and the other is
religious dogmatism yes and that's very
fair and and imputations of grandiosity
are are also Fair because I really I
feel like what I was doing in that book
is
attempting to draw a line in the sand to
defend the claim that the most important
questions in human life and the
questions that are are by definition the
most important questions and the
questions that where the greatest swings
in in value are to be found that the
answers to those questions exist whether
or not we can ever get them in hand and
certainly better and worse answers exist
and that it's possible to be right and
wrong or more right and more wrong about
those questions and so yes it's it's
very much a I wanted to to carve out the
intellectual space
where we could unabashedly
defend the intuition that moral truths
exist and that it's the morality is not
completely different moralian values all
together you know claims about right and
wrong and good and evil are not on some
completely different footing from the
rest of the truth claims and claims the
fact that we that we want to make about
the universe okay well
um so I agree that there's an
existential danger so I wasn't using the
word grandiose pejoratively I think
there is that danger and those those
whether they're the biggest Angels I'm
not entirely sure but they are
existential dangers which is bad enough
and and I agree with with what you just
said about morality there is true and
false immorality or right and wrong they
are objective they can be discovered by
the usual methods of Reason which uh are
essentially the same as those of science
although there are important differences
as I as I said when we last vote okay so
this was your purpose you had an
intellectual purpose that was morally
driven in developing this moral theory
and therefore you had this moral purpose
before you had the details of the moral
theory
so you you want it in advance
your theory to have certain properties
um as as you just said to create an
intellectual space in which one could
assert and defend the the proposition
that there's objective right and wrong
and so these properties that you wanted
the theory to have in advance weren't
just expressions of your personality or
something they were the fact that you
thought
the moral values that made you want to
write the book are true
objectively true well um forgive me I'm
starting to I'm smiling now because if
you could see me you'd see how much I'm
smiling because I've just amused at how
tenderly you're leading me down by the
hand down the slippery slope to the
dissolution of my theory I think theory
is too big a word for what I thought I
was putting forward I think I'm my
theory such as it is contained
explicitly the the assumption that
there's there are many things I can be
wrong about right now with the morality
that I have in hand right so like I'm
not my theory isn't based on my current
moral intuitions it's based on some of
them it's based on the intuition of of
what I what I call in various places
moral realism which is just the claim
that it's possible to be wrong it's
possible not to know what you're missing
it's possible to be cognitively closed
to to true facts about well-being in
this universe about how good life could
be if only you could live it or could
Discover it if only if you had the right
sort of mind that wouldn't give you
access to these states of Consciousness
so it's so so that's it's not so much
that I think well my intuition that gay
marriage should be legal is so
foundational that I know there's no
state of the universe that could
disconfirm it that's not that's not
where I'm standing it's just no it's the
intuition about realism and about about
the horizons
I wasn't making that sort of allegation
in fact I think I agree with everything
you've just said about morality you see
the thing is
the ideas the theory if you want to call
don't want to call it a theory whatever
it is that you express in the book
contains that but it also contains
something else it contains the something
else that I disagree with let's get it
there must be something else otherwise
because I've agreed with everything
you've just said the thing I suppose the
basic thing I disagree with
uh and this this agreement is probably
deeper than it sounds
um uh that you you one of the properties
you wanted to create this space
is that the the this theory of morality
or whatever you call it should be based
on a secure Foundation
um namely science and in particular
especially in Neuroscience or actually
although that that may be I mean I the
default is certainly mine in from the
subtitle onward and and the subtitle you
know the way subtitles of books get
get fashioned you as you probably know
there that's sometimes outside the
author's control as it was in this case
but
I wouldn't put it that way I would say
that it doesn't it's not that morality
has to be founded on the secure
foundations of science it's that the
truth claims we want to make about
morality are just as well founded
however well founded that turns out to
be as the truth claims we make in
science and that that really I'm talking
about this larger cognitive
space in which we make truth claims and
some of it for bureaucratic reasons or
methodological reasons we call these
these scientific claims some we call
historical some we call merely factual
some Sciences are not are still
struggling to be as scientific as other
Sciences but we still call them Sciences
but there is just this claim the claims
about
subjectivity and in particular about
well-being and what what influences it
and those claims I think are true
whether or not we can or true or false
whether or not we can ever get the data
in hand at any moment in history and I
just want to say I mean the example I I
may have used this last time with you
but the example I often use is
there is a fact of the matter about what
John F Kennedy was thinking the moment
before he got shot and yes we won't know
what he was thinking we don't actually
know what it was like to be him in fact
we know there's no way we could get
access to the data at this point and yet
we there's there's an infinite number of
things we could say about that that we
would know were wrong I mean I know he
wasn't thinking about String Theory I
know he wasn't you know trying to I know
he wasn't you know reiterating the the
largest prime number that we discovered
a year after he died again and again in
his mind you can go on like that until
the end of time knowing what what what
what his State of Consciousness excluded
and that's that's a fact that's a
factual Acclaim as we ever make in
science and so I what I was trying to
argue is that that morality you know
rightly considered is a space of Truth
claims that is on all fours with all the
other kinds of Truth claims we make
differences of methodology aside
yeah well there are two ways that that
something can be objective
um it and I think you're in favor of one
of them and I'm in favor of the other
that is
um things can be objective in the sense
that
um their truths about them just are
truths about the other thing like for
example chemistry the truths of
chemistry just are truths about physics
um and that maybe wasn't obvious when
chemistry started but it is obvious now
that some of the truths are emergent
truths but still in principle every
everything every every law of chemistry
everything you can say about chemical
reactions and so on
uh they are all statements about physics
and chemistry then is is objective
because physics is objective
then there's a different way of being
objective the the way in which
um the integers are exist objectively
they exist objectively not because and
again in the history of this
um there were different theories about
the integers that took different
positions about
whether they're real and if they're real
in what sense they're real I I think
that they are real in a separate sense
from physics the the truth about them
are independent of the truths of physics
not not that integers are objective
because there are some aspects of
physical objects but um they they're
objective because integers exist in some
sense that is not the same as existing
physically
and although they they you know they
have they have an influence in truths
about them are reflected in truths about
physical objects but they're not
identified as them if there's no nothing
we could
discover about the laws of physics could
possibly change the truth of
um theorems about prime numbers
and that that is the kind of truth I
mean
sorry that's the kind of Independence
that I think truths of morality have
um the
um you know you uh actually David can I
interrupt you there and just just
explore this a little bit because so I I
think I talk about this in the book at
some point I follow the philosopher John
Searle here I don't follow him in that
many things but he made a distinction
between the ontological and the
epistemological sense in which we can
use this word objective and I think that
that's a useful one that at least I've
been pressing into service a fair amount
one so if something's ontologically
objective it exists quote you know in
the real world whether or not anyone
knows about it it's independent of human
Minds it is the kinds of facts you just
described with you know chemistry and
physics and we can imagine a universe
without any conscious creatures and
those facts would still be the case even
though there's no one around to know
them and so that's ontological
objectivity and then there's
epistemological objectivity which is to
say that there's the spirit in which we
make various claims about facts of all
kinds which is to say that so to be
objective in the epistemological sense
you're not being misled by your own
confirmation bias or wishful thinking or
you're making honest claims about about
data and the consequences of logical
arguments and all the rest and what most
people worry about with respect to
objectivity versus subjectivity uh well
I guess I should talk talk about the
subjective side of those two things so
something can be ontologically
subjective which is to say it doesn't
exist independent of human minds or
conscious Minds it is a fact that is
only a fact given the existence of mind
so when I'm talking about what JFK
experienced the moment he got shot or
prior to that moment I'm making a claim
about his subjectivity but I can make
that claim I'm
in the sense of of it being
epistemologically objective which is to
say it's not it's not subjective
epistemologically I'm not being merely
misled by my bias and my my you know
dogmatic commitments I am B I can
objectively say about
that is epistemologically about JFK's
subjectivity that it was not
characterized by him meditating on on
the truth of string theory and so so you
can so I I'm more worried that the
ontological difference between objective
and subjective
doesn't really interest me it's useful
for certain conversations and I think
not useful for others and I think in the
case of morality
what we're talking about is how
experience arises in this universe and
what its character can be and the the
extremes of happiness and suffering that
conscious minds are susceptible to and
what are the the material and and social
and every other kind of requirements to
influence those those experiences and so
part of that conversation part of that
conversation takes us into the the
classically objective world of you know
in our case talking about
neurotransmitters and neurons and and
you know economic systems and quote
objective reality at every scale that in
any given instance may not actually
require a human mind to be talked about
but the cash value of all of that if
you're talking about morality from my
point of view is conscious states of
conscious creatures and and whether
they're being made more or less happy in
in as in as capacious a definition of
happiness or well-being as possible I
mean as you know that's a it's a kind of
a suitcase word I use to incorporate the
range of positive experience Beyond
which we The Horizon Beyond which we
can't currently imagine and the opposite
being that we're you know the worst
possible misery for everyone so the
status of integers
whether they occupy some
kind of platonic zone of existence that
is in not in fact linked to material
reality in any way but we still have to
talk about it as being real whether or
not anyone has discovered it I I
actually don't
I don't have strong intuitions about
that at all I mean it seems like oh yeah
I feel like we touched that in our last
conversation and I think you could
probably argue that one way or the other
but to bring it back to what you were
just saying I guess
there's the physical reality which is
often called objective ontologically of
chemistry and physics there are things
like integers which are not as you just
said dependent on what we know about
atoms but then there are the experiences
of conscious systems whether or not we
can ever
understand what those experiences are
they have a certain character and that
character depends upon the whatever
material
requisites exist for those conscious
systems but that hasn't been worked out
and it and it's also it may and even if
you work that out perfectly it's still
it's the subjective side of that coin
that is of Interest
so so yes
[Music]
um it's funny just at the end you you
you you said what I was about to say it
took me a while so I I know that you use
the term science for example to more
broadly than some people and and I think
that's quite right so do I uh and so you
and I both use it to encroach on things
that some people who think they're
purists
uh would like to exclude from science
um but to expand
science you know so therefore part of
philosophy you can call part of Science
and the the criteria poppers Criterion
of demarcation is not intended to be
either uh sharp uh or
um
a pejorative you know or Criterion of
meaning or worth Wellness or anything
like that it's just a matter of
convenience a matter of convenient
classification of subject matter if you
want to extend the term science to cover
certain things that are traditionally
considered
um philosophy like like the
interpretation of quantum theory for
example which I think is definitely part
of Science and uh but then it
sort of
make the connection between
human well-being and Neuroscience then
you you know you're trying to encroach
on neuro philosophy as it were and neuro
philosophy is epistemology it's and the
thing but once you've extended it to
neuro philosophy and into epistemology
you run into a deep fact about the
physical world
which is that epistemology
is substrate independent it is it it
once you have once knowledge or or uh
feelings or Consciousness or any kind of
information or computation is
instantiated in a universal device
then the laws it obeys are completely
independent of the physics and of the
neurology and and every kind of physical
attribute of the device Falls away
and you can talk about the properties of
those things as abstract things or not
perhaps abstract is the wrong word
because they're perfectly objective it's
just that they're not atoms right
they're not neurons
I would just say that I think at this
point I'll go with you there I think I
think that's probably true but what your
what you seem to be smuggling in there
in the leap from atoms is
a kind of
kind of information based functionalism
where we just we're assuming for the
purposes of this conversation that we
know Consciousness to be
an emergent property of information
processing and it's not some other
constituent of physical reality that
isn't based on bits but if we if we
assume that it is if it's if it is if it
is judged with something that computers
non-biological computers can can one day
have yeah well then I'm with you
[Music]
this is something that that is generally
true of morality that that morality has
a reach
if you don't
steal a book from a library when you you
realize that you easily could do so
without getting caught
um this doesn't just affect you and the
library
this this because this comes from
a universal machine which is you this
this
um uh machine has Universal theories
or theories which try to be Universal
theories or are Universal in some domain
or other and when you
commit the crime for instance you're
changing the facts you're changing
something that you can't change back
isn't that change occurring in you
assuming that there's no one else who
will ever discover your act I mean where
else would the change occur but in you
it's well for example
suppose you're telling your children
about morality
do you say
okay well when you're in that Library
situation it's okay to steal the book
because no one will ever find it out
right or do you say no you shouldn't
even in that situation
if the if the first then it's affecting
your child as well yeah and if the
second then you are lying to your child
itself has vast implications yeah no I'm
I'm totally with you there I just let's
Linger on this one point that again it's
I understand it's disconcertingly far
afield but I just think it's interesting
so if you could apply a painless local
anesthetic to the child for the purposes
of of receiving a vaccine that would be
a better thing to do and it's being
better is the measure of
it's or or the claim that it's better is
synonymous with the claim that it's good
to reduce needless
suffering and the suffering is is both
needless and and in fact probably
harmful for the child to whatever
degrees yes I I'd say that my first the
first line of my critique would be that
it violates the the human rights of the
child but but okay there are all these
other things which are related I think
that
the way we interpret and value very
powerful stimuli is remarkably
susceptible to the conceptual frame
around which yes that experience is is
held and yes successful conceptual frame
within which it is held so which is to
say your thoughts about your experience
and your thoughts about reality are in
many cases constituentive of of the the
subtotal of the experience
and there are many things but this does
connect back to
I agree with you about about human
rights and consent to a large degree I
think I think we want certainly when
you're talking about adults
who can consent you want them to be able
to consent to
various experiences but I can still
imagine
experiences that are unpleasant that it
turns out
are very good for a person and you have
done them a great favor
if you subject them to these experiences
and you may in fact I mean it's just
kind of a paternalistic claim of a
possibility you may in fact be doing
someone a favor to subject them to these
experiences without their explicit
consent if in fact the benefits are so
great now I don't know what those
experiences are but let's just say it's
true that you know a culture finds that
there's a certain ordeal that you can
put teenagers through and many of the
teenagers don't want to do it but
it is just so good for you as a human
being that strikes me as possible I just
don't have an example but I do see I see
people who do consent to do things which
are really incredibly difficult you know
like like people become Navy Seals you
know I I've met some of these guys and
you know they've got they in many cases
literally went through hell to to equip
themselves with the with the skills they
they've got and part of the the training
is a kind of culling of all the people
who are not fit to yes go through the
training in the first place and so it is
a selection procedure but these guys go
through an intense ordeal and come out
in many ways enviably strong
psychologically and physically as a
result and I can see that that there are
extreme experiences that we we might not
want to rule out just in Principle as
being bad for us as as I said that the
if it's a matter of knowledge if we know
this
then
um
an explanation if we have an explanation
we can give it to the people uh if if we
have a machine that can detect whether
somebody would benefit from Navy SEAL
training and it can just detect this by
putting it on their head and pressing a
button then you would probably find that
a lot of people who aren't Navy Seals
would benefit from it
and if it's true if the theory on which
this machine is based has a good
explanation then you should be able to
persuade those people to take the
training or you might say yeah well but
what it also what if you can't or what
if the benefits you're conferring on
someone is so it is out of is Out Of
Reach to them so let's say let's say you
have people with severe autism who
really can't consent to much of anything
and you can't really explain the
benefits you're about to give them but
the benefits you're about to give them
is a cure for autism yes well this
reminds me of a you know cure for
lesbianism or something I mean there are
people who think that raping somebody
will do them good under various
circumstances but you you can't base
system or a memorial system on saying
that if one thinks that that's true once
you do it it will not be it could but
clearly in that case it certainly sounds
like it on its face to be a a delusional
and unethical
claim yes we're considering all sorts of
uh yeah all sorts of implausible things
here what I hear you doing is using the
principle of consent
and human rights to Trump
everything else that it's more
epistemology because I don't think human
rights are fundamental either they are
they are just a way of implementing
um institutions that uh promote the
growth of knowledge and the reason why
knowledge trumps everything else here is
fallibleism in all these cases where we
have a theory that something is better
we're we're implementing a moral theory
and we might be mistaken about that and
the
uh it must be a fundamental fact of
morality of an objective truth of
morality that it's immoral
to close off the paths to correction of
a theory if it turns out to be false oh
yeah I'm totally with you there but so
but that seems to be a certain my you
know underlying claim which is human
flourishing conceived as broadly as you
want and if it's a definition that is
continually open in in the manner you
just described for refinement and and
you know fallibleism that is the point
and you know we want to move in the
direction of better and better worlds
with better and better experiences and
who knows how far that can go but we
know it's possible to move in the wrong
direction and we never want to we do we
never want to tie our hands and make it
impossible to correct course
yes so as if once you have an
institution that allows that this is
this is why consent isn't just uh you
know a nice thing to have it's it's it's
a fundamental feature of the way we
handle ideas
um if you have a system that allows
people to enforce an idea
on another person who disagrees with the
idea then the the means of correcting
errors are are closed off
disability or something and couldn't but
but could be cured of that stability but
they couldn't be explained to them and
so on well the thing is either those
people are
in a constant state of suffering in in
which case applying the thing to them
won't change that
or there is a thing that they prefer to
some other thing and then there will be
a path towards the better state that
involves just doing things that they
prefer like if it involves an injection
then it might involve
um either an anesthetic or getting into
a certain mood in which an injection
doesn't matter let me give you an
example again I want to get back to
these core issues but all this is just I
find too interesting I think this is an
example that I mentioned somewhere in
the moral landscape but I'm not sure the
Nobel Laureate in economics Danny
Kahneman did some research I think he
was just associated with this research I
don't think he was the main author on
this paper but they did
fascinating research on people receiving
colonoscopies and this wasn't at a point
where there was no like there was no
Twilight anesthesia associated with
colonoscopy so people really had to
suffer the full ordeal and
they discovered they were they were
trying to figure out what accounted for
the subjective measures of of suffering
associated with this procedure and also
what would positively influence the
compliance of patients to come back and
get another one on schedule five years
later or ten years later or whatever it
was so they found that the
this confirmed I don't know if this this
was the first instance but that but
there's something in Psychology and
called the peak end rule which is your
your judgment about the character of an
experience is largely determined by the
peak intensity of the experience whether
that was good or bad and what the
character of the experience was at the
end of the episode so those are the two
the real levers you can you can pull to
to influence whether someone thought
they had a good time or a bad time and
to test this they they gave you know the
control group they gave these ordinary
colonoscopies and you know took the
appliance out at the first moment that
where it was where the procedure was
over but in the experimental condition
they did everything the same except they
left the apparatus in quite
unnecessarily for some minutes at the
end providing a a low in 10 intensity a
comparatively low intensity but but
decidedly negative and again unnecessary
stimulus to the to the subjects and the
result was that their impression of how
much they had suffered was significantly
reduced and their willingness to come
back and get a potentially life-saving
colonoscopy in the future was increased
so you know greater percentage of them
showed up in five years for their next
colonoscopy and so this was a you know
by by any real measure this was a a good
thing to have done to these people
except what in fact it was if you just
take the the window of time around the
procedure it was prolonging and
unpleasant experience without any
medical necessity right and yeah so
that's so I just just want you to
there's going to be a way of telling
them that you're doing this and it's
still working
presumably but what if what if in fact
is true that
the placebo effect is ruined if you if
you tell someone that that might be
what's happening to them or that you've
done you've done you've done this thing
it's not medically necessary but we're
going to leave this tube in for a few
minutes because you're going to feel
better about it afterwards what if that
actually cancels the effect again
um the universe hasn't got it in for us
it it doesn't like us at all it doesn't
care about us but it hasn't got it in
for us if what you just said is the case
then uh you could for example there'll
be a way of getting around it for
example you could say to them uh you
could say to the patient look there is a
way of reducing the amount of perceived
suffering of this procedure but it
involves a placebo
but it won't work if we tell you what
the placebo is
so
um you know do you give us permission to
use this Placebo and of course the
information will say yes but what and if
that doesn't work
there'll be some other way but but is
that really consent because what if we
just will run the alternate experiment
what if we say
we pose it like that to people and then
you know 99 say sure you know sign me up
but we we have a another condition where
we just now we're just doing research on
compliance and we say we tell them
exactly what the placebo is in this case
we're going to leave the tube in you for
five minutes not doing anything and
you're you're gonna for that for those
full five minutes those will be five
minutes where you would have been saying
when's this going to be over already and
you could have been off the table and
and driving home but you know now you're
still on the table with this tube in you
but that's the placebo let's say the
people who sign up for that drops down
to 17 so now we know that there's all
these people in the first condition who
are only consenting because you have
masked what the placebo is and so in
fact they're not really consenting to
the thing you're doing
I I think that's still consent right
rather like you know if you if you uh
you don't have to
you don't have to be a doctor and and
have know exactly what the heart surgeon
is going to do to your heart in order to
to
um
consent validly consent to heart surgery
and it's the the same with the placebo
you know if you're told that it it won't
work if you know what the placebo is but
there will be one then you're consenting
and the P the one percent who still say
no
uh those people are just making
supposing it's true those people are
simply making a mistake the same kind of
mistake as you would be making if this
whole Theory wasn't true
you know we we can't you can't uh
um buy us
the rules under which people interact
towards a particular Theory
that they disagree about
but there are people who have
ideas about reality and ideas about how
we should all live within it which are
so
perverse and
incompatible with everything we could
reasonably want to do in this world that
we we do have to we have to wall off
their aspirations from the rest of
what's going on I mean whether that's
locking them in prison because they just
are so badly behaved or just exiling
them in some way from the conversation
you know so that again but the people I
use are like you know the Taliban or
Isis you know they don't they don't get
to vote on our public policy and for
good reason because their votes would be
crazy
um yes well we again we we have
institutions we try to tune the
institutions to have the property that
um uh the political institution should
have the property that disputes between
people are resolved without violence
uh and the the moral institutions
include the idea that participating and
obeying such institutions is morally
right and also in in interpersonal
relationships that don't involve the law
uh we still want we we want to be better
than that we want we want uh
interpersonal relationship not only
to resolve disputes without violence but
we want them to resolve disputes without
any kind of coercion
an institution that institutionalizes
coercion about something is ipso facto
irrational now I'm not saying that I
know of Institutions that achieve this
perfectly I am saying that this is a
rough Criterion any more than I do in
the political case
I'm saying that that's the Criterion by
which institutions should be judged by
it by how well they are how good they
are at resolving disputes between people
without violence without coercion so so
but there are people are people who are
not rational actors who occasionally
have to be coerced right yeah uh well
um sometime in the future we'll know of
way we already have ways of getting
along which involve far less coercion
like that as Stephen Pinker has pointed
out then what was needed to stabilize
Society you know 100 years ago 200 years
ago and that's I expect this to continue
and they're they're
you know one day somebody might invent a
way of curing the most fanatical mass
murderer you know terrorist mass
murderer and and
um converting him to a benign religion
or to atheism or whatever but but you
know initially when this is invented
this is fabulously expensive because it
involves putting him into a into a
artificial Community with thousands of
actors who have to be trained to act in
a certain way towards him and then um
blah blah blah and so under those
circumstances we still wouldn't do it
even though it was possible to save him
it's still better to imprison him
because uh the the institutions couldn't
survive if we had to spend billions of
pounds on every terrorist
but once it's down to thousands of
pounds we might we might um
uh if we knew how to do it then we
certainly would do it what if he what if
he didn't want it done to him what if he
wanted to remain a psychopath terrorist
so I the way I see that is that
um you know he he'd have been caught at
some point and and then he'd have been
put on trial and then he'd be sentenced
and then these methods would have the
property that they would they would uh
you know so a good method might have him
consent uh to what was happening after a
month and the better one would have him
consent after a week and you can imagine
millions of years in the future
there will be methods So Sophisticated
You know that they will involve things
like doing a brain scan and discovering
some memories of his and and uh working
out a customized
um treatment for him which involves the
sun coming out from behind the cloud at
the exact moment when he leaves the
courthouse and so on
so I think there's no limit to No Limit
to the possibility of removing Evil by
knowledge yeah well I agree with you
there and and in that case
it's no longer evil it's just bad luck
you you were the victim of bad luck to
be the kind of person who wanted to be a
terrorist or or who was you know
biologically susceptible to being a
terrorist and once we have the the cure
for terrorism or the cure for
psychopathy or anything else that that
falls under the the rubric of evil at
the moment there'd be no more moralizing
about it than there is moralizing about
a cure for diabetes we would just give
the Cure
I mean he would still say after he'd
been cured he would still say
um what I did was wrong yeah oh yeah I
mean I I think it would be a bit more
than to say what I did was a mistake
it's different oh no he might he might
be horrified by what he did he might say
that's I can't believe I was the kind of
person who wanted to do that yeah so
that that could be killed too
but but you can imagine a feeling of
gratitude to no longer be that person
once he was restored to yes you know
decent Humanity by or the Cure that's
what in my view that completely negates
the underlying ethic or the claimed
ethic of Justice as a matter of
Retribution you know the way oh yes
we're punishing people because they
deserve it on some level
I agree it's it's just a matter of
operating the institution which is the
best institution we have for achieving
this
um absolutely vital purpose
one thought experiment that may expose
something of Interest or not but and
then I want to just ask you what you
think we actually disagree about because
I think I find it possible yeah there's
one one more important thing I want to
say about your book but okay Carry On
yes well I guess so they imagine that
this future of of
completed science of the mind where we
not only understand the brain basis or
the the computational basis of every
possible experience but we can we can
intervene as as completely as we would
want so I you know I now have this
machine that I can put on your head and
you can we can dial in any possible
conscious State it's just this perfect
experience machine well wait we'll we'll
always have limited knowledge and
therefore the only States we'll be able
to download are the ones with knowledge
that we already know uh the vast
majority of possible States will always
be on I mean the infinite majority will
always be unknown can't we use this
device to plumb experiences that have
yet to be characterized well there are
exponentially many of them so so we
can't because we won't know all of them
no I'm not claiming that there's a a
finite number of experiences and we'll
know all of them but there's there is
the experience of knowing
tomorrow's scientific discovery which we
will never be able to download into
somebody until tomorrow right I would
exclude all experiences of that type I'm
talking about conscious States I mean
let's let's just say we've recorded
let's trim it down to something simpler
but let's say we've we've taken
a range of people
who are good candidates for having the
best sorts of human experiences so we've
taken you know the best scientists and
the best and the most saintly people in
the the ethical space and the best
athletes and the most creative artists
and we've we not only have recorded
their experience and you're able to
sample their direct experience but we've
we've extrapolated from their experience
and the various commonalities among
different classes of experience and we
have produced kind of Novel experiences
that are in some ways even better or
certainly more extreme or or just
fundamentally new to the human mind so
that you you take a a little bit of John
Von Neumann and you take a little Mozart
or their equivalence that we have access
to and you throw in you know the what
it's like to be Lionel Messi scoring his
you know record-breaking goal and you
you can get all this to tuned up in
various ways and
and you've got all the Time in the World
to explore various States Of
Consciousness to see
which you prefer
so my question is
there's something about my thesis that
presupposes that we will Converge on the
the value of those kinds of experiences
that you you and I will not have
radical disjunctions in our sense of
what is good given an ever-expanding
menu a possible experience and if we do
have disjunctions if you if you really
like experience you know 45 and I really
like 46 and I had to test 45 and and
vice versa well then that difference
will have an explanation about you know
a neurological one or so you know
computational one which will also be
open for revision then then the question
is
you know how should we change our
intuitions about what is good in light
of what is possible and is it good to
change one's a sense of what is good
there's a kind of a misconception there
about well at least a mismatch between
that and how I think of Minds so
this assumes that there's such a thing
as a happy State of Mind
uh that's that's like
um orthogonal to the the question of
what is being uh processed so if you say
you know can be as happy as Mozart that
that kind
of omits the question of what specific
music what specific problem
are you solving as Mozart are you
solving one of the ones that he solved
when he was alive one of the specific
ones well then in that case you're just
repeating
an experience which is not the same as
as I mean that isn't can't be what
happiness consists of because we need to
make progress so we're I think we're
more characterized by our problems than
by our uh particular ideas at a
particular time what are the problems so
a happy person is somebody who has a set
of problems which are hard enough to be
worthwhile uh devoting a lot of effort
to interesting enough
um and yet uh not so hard that you can't
make any progress
and these problems will consist of
conflicts between theories the conflicts
again must be interesting and and so now
uh it's not obvious that you can
download this into something without it
simply being a recreation of the
individual person uh you know if if I
get if I get a download of Mozart's
theories as they were at a particular
time then it's
think it would be
I could sort of
have the equivalent of remembering what
it felt like to solve that problem but
it wouldn't be my problem
unless they uh unless they manage to
integrate it with the rest of me so much
that I was actually Mozart in which case
what's the point right
um one thing I would add here is that I
think there are states of Consciousness
that are
clearly extraordinarily Pleasant and
it's the kind of pleasantness that does
that does shine through in moments where
we are satisf we're solving problems in
in satisfying ways but you can tap into
this pleasure in a way that isn't at all
dependent on having interesting problems
to solve or successfully solving them
and it's in some ways of tapping into
this pleasure certainly seem
pathological or or at least it's It's
tap it's these experiences don't allow
you to solve interesting problems and
your ability to wallow in the pleasure
is predicated on your neighbor solving
some interesting problems so if you want
to be a heroin addict and just lie on
the couch all day and dissolve into the
Bliss of a heroin High well
you may be able to do that I mean let's
say there's a maybe we could probably
pick a drug that's you know hasn't been
discovered yet or invented yet that's
better than heroin but it doesn't have
its obvious downside but just being able
to sustain that you know pure opiate
pleasure it may be something which if
you could compare that experience to the
experience of being Mozart you would
actually prefer the experience of being
on you know heroin plus but you might I
think no I think only at first yeah well
that's true so that's that just remains
and that's an empirical question that
remains to be seen and I I share that
intuition but at the very least let's
just say that's true let's Grant the the
sort of depressing case that you know
they kind of the Elvis Huxley style
punch line which is we all just want to
be medicated into Oblivion and that's
what we would in fact prefer if we if we
could get our hands up
I I I think this this this is a myth
that people
um can be trained to interpret heroin as
so pleasure isn't Joy and people can be
trained by our culture and and by their
circumstances uh for instance if they
haven't experienced much joy to
interpret pleasure as Joy
but it doesn't fulfill the same function
in the mind and and it's particularly
Insidious because when you first
experience it it might well be Joy
because then you are investigating a new
experience and and a new way of being
and and you know New Sensations and so
on and that is interesting and therefore
can be Joy
um but once you're um once you're doing
this every day and it's your way of life
then it gives you nothing and if you
nevertheless interpret that nothing as
being good then
um well that's like being dead you know
it's it's it's it's it's not a human
state of mind and I think I think in
reality the vast majority of actual
heroin addicts stop of their own accord
because they're bored with it the
problem you've just described though the
the difference between mere pleasure and
joy
is obviously a problem that we could
overcome with yet more knowledge so more
knowledge would allow us to bridge that
and you could create this kind of
perfect Oblivion that it included Joy
I don't think so because what if you
know now you're assuming that there's
kind of a joy receiving Center in the
brain which receives
messages from the creating something
Center and and then but if you could
simulate the former Center artificially
then that would just but I don't think
it can possibly be like that
um that that I think the only way you
can create Joy artificially is by
downloading some
state of a person who is experiencing
joy and then you would be that person
but haven't you ever had a dream so
again this is an empirical question and
you might be right but what I'm
imagining here is now forget about drugs
now we're talking about something that's
more like the Matrix where you could you
know every mind could be just consigned
to this this Oblivion which could be as
creative or as apparently creative as as
you like but it would in fact be this
this isolation where it's it's just a
it's just a simulacrum where you're not
actually dealing with other Minds you
know you you've lost reality and you're
now in virtual reality and but virtual
reality is so good and so creative and
so conducive to Joy that it's is there
in your mind ethically is there an
important difference between being in
reality and being in some kind of
Dreamscape of our own invention not not
from the person's I mean assuming that
he's gotten into this thing voluntarily
so it's that well in that case what he's
experiencing is real Joy uh generated
genuinely generated by his own mind in
the same way that that any other Joy is
and and actually this matrix-like thing
is not so far from the truth if we if
we're thinking of for example a pure
mathematician uh you know Hardy said
that that a nice thing about being a
mathematician is that you can sit in the
armchair after dinner with your eyes
shut and nobody knows whether you're
working or not right
um so you know he's in the virtual
reality of pure mathematics and he's
experiencing great joy and great
creativity just in the con confines of a
few cubic centimeters of brain
so we produced a matrix like this and we
decide to migrate human consciousness
into it but then
then where does consent come into view
if new minds are simply spawned into
this Matrix I mean how is that any I
mean you you and I didn't consent to be
born into the universe
there's no one to blame for that would
we be blaming the generation of humans
who created The Matrix for the for all
the rest of us that well obviously
they're they're practical issues you
know how safe is this thing from real
life
um asteroid strikes and so on but
assuming that that kind of problem can
be dealt with well then I I don't see I
mean it is there is an ethics
I use the word ethics slightly you use
you say ethics and morality they're
almost interchangeably ethics I I would
use more as just a set of practical
rules like the medical ethics you know
what doctors have to do to be safe that
they won't be criticized morally they
would have to be an ethics of
um creating people in the virtual
reality
um if there was a phenomenon of people
sometimes wanting to get out then there
would have to be a pass out
um and
um that I think that's just a practical
problem there's not no deep morality
there
you don't have a strong bias so for
instance at least the Matrix I'm
imagining all the people you'd be
dealing with
wouldn't be real people I mean it would
be like you'd be like a dream so
everyone would be in there in a dream of
their own that would allow for a maximum
creativity but
yeah there wouldn't be genuine uh
collaboration on any problem because the
other people wouldn't be creative
so uh you might notice this after a
while and this might be but but you know
some people like it that way
um that it is definitely true that
people collaborating
can create better and faster than the
sum of the them individuals
uh but that's only a general rule it is
sometimes people like to work by
themselves and like to be by themselves
um uh you know I'm fairly solitary and
uh as long as they're free to do
otherwise so I think in this in this
Matrix where there was only one person
one real person
were zombies
um uh I I think very few people would
want to be there
but those who did you know fine it's
it's uh as long as they are creative
that's the fundamental thing by the way
I think there's a concept of being
entertained
by other people or by things or by
heroin or by by
TV programs or whatever
that is a mistake
we may
subjectively feel or we may interpret
what's happening as the other thing
entertaining us
but really the only thing that
entertains us is our own creative
engagement with it
and without that creative engagement
nothing can entertain us and this this
you know when people get this wrong idea
about what entertainment is that that's
the kind of mistake where they where
they think that
that something mechanical such as heroin
uh can can entertain them the these uh
cliched
situations where somebody
wins the lottery and then is miserable
and I I think that the the generic
um trap that one can fall into in in
this sort of situation is by thinking
that money can entertain me not
realizing that only you can entertain
you and same with uh you know rock stars
who who think that if they had a life of
uh as much sex as they like and as much
drugs as they like and then so on then
they'd be happy and then one in a
million of them actually achieves that
and they find that they're miserable
that's a cliche which strikes me as very
plausible yeah yeah well so I I agree
with that I think however there is
another way to
be happy and in some ways it's it's a
more fundamental way of being happy or
experiencing well-being which is
is in some important sense not the
result of being creative so I I agree
with you that that it that there's just
to follow your line through
entertainment the the opposite of being
entertained is being bored and yes but
boredom
in my experience really is nothing more
than a lack of attention and the the
reason why I say this is so I have this
experience of Having learned to meditate
and I've spent a lot of time practicing
various techniques of meditation and
you know from the side of one who wants
to be creative and solving problems much
of this perhaps all of it looks like
a quite a crazy and unproductive thing
to do so for instance I've done
meditation Retreats where I've gone into
silence for the longest period has been
three months on a retreat where you're
doing nothing but meditate you know 12
to 18 hours a day depending on on how
you know how much you're sleeping and
the meditation consists of nothing more
than pain very close attention
to the contents of Consciousness and and
so for the longest time when you're
learning to do this the technique is
just paying attention to your breath the
sensation of breathing and once you have
some ability to concentrate on on the on
breathing you open it up and you can pay
attention to anything that's arising
your moods and other Sensations and
sights and sounds and thoughts
themselves arise in Consciousness but
for the purposes of of this practice of
meditation there's nothing worth
thinking about yeah I mean this this is
it really is and the practice is kind of
is inimical to creative thought because
you have decided not to follow any train
of thought the moment you notice it has
arisen and what you put you continually
find is that you know when you're
meditating you're paying close attention
to something the breath say and then a
thought comes upon you in a way that you
didn't notice and all of a sudden you
that you're left thinking for five
minutes something you know some creative
thought or some boring thought or
whatever it is and then you then you
notice that you're thinking you notice
the thought itself as an object in
Consciousness and then you come back to
the practice of just being aware but the
deeper you go into this which is to say
the more concentrated you become the
less thoughts intrude and and the
earlier you notice them and and the
moment you notice them they unravel and
disappear and you're left with just
the prior condition of Consciousness and
so but this becomes a circumstance of
absolutely Exquisite happiness and
well-being and in fact I mean there's
much more to say about this but I would
say that
at least it's not prototypically
creative you're not it's not a matter of
generating many new Concepts or
following them to on to new theories or
solving problems that require discursive
thought
so uh you know I I know nothing about
meditation uh you know more than what
you've just told me uh but so and you
know it could be that the whole thing is
an illusion but uh since it's you I
doubt it so most thinking is actually
unconscious
while we're consciously aware of is just
the tip of the iceberg and even in our
conscious thoughts they're supported by
a rich infrastructure of unconscious
thoughts and those uh obey exactly the
same epistemology as the conscious ones
so they can be creative they can be
uncreative they can be irrational they
can be rational they can make progress
or not and it depends on the same
conditions
um with conditions which either promote
or or inhibit the growth of knowledge in
various ways so assuming that at the end
of this process you're a better person
that is your mind is a better mind
uh that means that that betterness has
been created by something and if you're
not consciously aware of the process
then it's been created by your
unconscious mind and it could be that
the that under certain circumstances
um deliberately preventing your
conscious mind from doing anything
clears some obstacles to creativity in
your unconscious mind
obstacles are are themselves ideas
and it could be that there there are
um in fact the unconscious mind almost
certainly goes wrong more often than the
conscious one
so this could be a simply a way of
enhancing creativity after all well
actually I would just say nothing really
turns on this but it's definitely true
that it is and one of the you know this
is viewed as an obstacle from the side
of meditation but it's you know if you
want to be creative you know you can do
this from either side but when one is
trying to meditate and do nothing but
that it's a very common experience to
find that you have more and more
creative thoughts well if you're a
novelist you'll have the best ideas
you've ever had for for dialogue you
should write or or stories you should
write and and suppressing all this or
letting go of all this in the interest
of staying on Retreat can become you
know very difficult to do and I've
actually had Retreats where I failed to
do it where I've you know I'm I'm
intending to do nothing but meditate but
I have some idea for something to write
or something to think more about that I
just convinces me that I you know I
should not let go of it and it
completely derail build the retreat that
is something that happens but the I
would just say that the value of the
experience is not merely that it equips
you to be more creative in the in the
future
the value is that there there's a
there's a fundamental Insight here about
the nature of well-being itself and the
nature of suffering and just the
mechanics of human suffering which you
can there's a there's a riddle to be
solved here which can be solved which
allows you yes it allows you to be more
creative in the future allows you to be
happier in the future it allows you to
suffer Less in the future which and that
all of that is all that's what's
important but in the moment too
it's it also tastes it is the experience
you want to have in that moment
if it's true that it's your unconscious
mind being creative then that's exactly
what you'd expect you'd expect
an unconscious well-being to permeate up
uh and then you become aware of it which
previously hadn't been happening because
something was something in your
conscious mind was preventing it the way
it seems to me is more that there's
you're ceasing to do something that you
are helplessly you're deeply conditioned
to do and kind of helplessly doing all
the time in in other states of
Consciousness which is negatively
creative which is to say it's creative
of neurosis and fear and anxiety yes and
all the rest yes yes so you cease to do
that yeah
creative yes well I I feel like you
haven't we haven't totally nailed what
we might disagree about because I'm just
feeling yeah
yeah just as a last thing let me just
say that
the overview of your book I mean I I
think your book achieves its purpose and
it it is a uh very timely and and
important purpose and if if I have a
criticism of sort of fundamental logic
of it it I I can't even say that I'm
sure that if if it had been written to
conform to what I think what I'm about
to say it would have achieved its
purpose better so I don't know whether
it would or not
um but but as a matter of Truth so I
want to take the same attitude towards
moral theories
as Papa does towards scientific theories
and therefore regard all the
uh theories about morality which claimed
to give it a foundation
as being mistaken but all of them uh
have more or less value
uh some of them much less and some of
them much more regarded not as
ideas about about morality but as
critiques so I I think that uh say for
example so there are there are lots of
um different
um uh
um
suggestions for the foundation like you
know kant's categorical imperative and
utilitarianism and and
um uh rules is fairness and and the will
of God you know and and and human
flourishing so all those
uh are proposals for foundations of
morality but if you if you've guard them
instead as critiques
then I think they are they're all quite
valuable
um uh and and human flourishing could be
interpreted as as a sort of the as an
improvement on what went before as a
critique
so you can say for example you know with
utilitarianism
uh they were able to say you know
um if
um uh what we're supposed to do uh what
what morality consists of is is
um going to church every Sunday
what purpose does this serve and if it
doesn't serve any purpose it's up to the
person who Advocates it to
um
to make the case to to it's it's prima
facie critique of something that it
doesn't have a purpose and so that
therefore it puts the onus on the on the
religious morality person to explain why
although usually if something doesn't
have a purpose we can reject it in this
case we should not reject it then you
could say well because God said so and
then there is the standard critique of
religious based anything of how can we
tell the difference between that claim
and someone else's claim to add uh based
on a different God or a different holy
book or whatever what Criterion should
we use
and if he says well the Criterion is
that our our one is correct then uh that
is a bad explanation because everyone
else could use the same Criterion so it
doesn't it's the Criterion that isn't a
criteria
uh so I I think human flourishing is is
a similar but utilitarianism
regarded as a fundamental theory is
rubbish
um it it uh you know regarded as a
critique of other theories it's very
powerful and I think you're uh thing is
like utilitarianism but it also has
elements
of some of the other uh it also has
elements of plain Common Sense which is
often forgotten by these theorists let
me just re-characterize my Foundation a
little bit differently because it's not
so much that it's certainly not merely a
human flourishing because it extends to
all possible conscious systems but my
base claim is that
there is a a space of possible minds and
possible experiences and there are
experiences that are better and worse
than others whether or not we'll ever
discover them whether or not the
requisite Minds could make judgments
about them but the worst possible misery
for everyone is bad if the word bad is
going to mean anything and I think that
is as foundational Acclaim as we ever
make in science about anything and the
foundation upon which
even paparian Science is based it seems
to me is just a claim about there being
a larger reality than the one we
currently have in hand which is to say
there's stuff we we can be confused
about this stuff that's uh it's it's not
a foundation in the sense of being
uncriticizable we can always say why
that Criterion and not another Criterion
why assume that we exist well I assume
that there is a truth I think that one
is giving up unnecessarily
if one says well there are some things
you just have to accept on faith you
have to start somewhere I don't think
you have to start somewhere and I think
all claims to start somewhere are
fallacies can't you start with
Consciousness because because cut for me
I mean Consciousness as defined
that there's something that is like to
be
yeah
you don't know if you're this might be a
dream you might be a brain and a bat you
might be confused about everything but
yeah the fact that there's so there's a
starting point the fact that there's
Consciousness it doesn't get us anywhere
you you have a certain substantive
conception of what it is to be conscious
and as we've discovered in this
conversation different people can have
different conceptions for example I I
prefer to think of of of the Mind as a
dynamic thing that's constantly uh
um
not self-consistent
whereas other people would regard
uh well you regard happiness sort of
more as a state
and I think the the you can't separate
it from the specifics of what it is so
that you there's no such thing as
downloading Mozart's happiness without
downloading his actual problems I agree
with that it's just that there is
I think there are two levels to it but I
agree with you that this comes back to
the framing issue just the fact that
certain experiences of suffering or
unpleasant experience can be framed in
such a way that they seem to be great
you know Peak experiences of of
well-being but I but I but all of all of
that is
again these are just empirical claims
that could be borne out more or less so
for instance if if someone could you
know you're going to have your next year
of creative thought now and it will be
whatever it will be you know you're a a
mountaineer of physics experiencing
Pleasure and Pain but even the pain is
is adding to the interests say to some
degree but but some pains aren't let's
say let's say we could add yes we could
add something to your tea every morning
which would make you just a little bit
happier in the conventional sense
throughout all of that creativity and
theorizing and and that let's just say
there's an optimal way to dial it so
that it's just a fact about you that it
could be yeah it could be twice as
pleasant as you're tending to have it
and you'll be just as creative right so
I think yes I think we should do that
but I don't think it would add I don't
think the
um flourishing meter would would
register this even though we should do
which I suppose is an argument to cancel
Theory
why would you say that because if you
lost this thing but let's well let's
let's let's go better than double let's
say by a factor of of five or ten so
that that the kinds of days you would
have going forward if you've reviewed
your history of being a conscious being
you would recognize that the days that
you're going to have 300 days this year
that previously
each one of which would have been the
best day of your life previously and
you're still going to be as creative
nothing will be lost in terms of you
know were you getting things done you're
saying that the flourishing meter
wouldn't register that
yes I mean
I've slightly lost track of exactly what
you're putting in my tea here it's good
too if it's the either it's going to be
a Mindless thing in which case as I say
it is worth doing so we are
we are accustomed to levels of physical
comfort that would have been
inconceivable even you know 50 years ago
or 100 years people like say Newton or
Mozart
um lived lives of of
incredible awkwardness and
uncomfortableness and you know that it
was never never really warm in the
winter and it was never really cool in
the summer and the the bath was never
the right temperature and the food never
tasted quite right and and they were
constantly in danger of various kinds
and their clothes itched and you know I
could go on forever and ever and and yet
they were happy
it was possible to be happy under those
circumstances it's definitely worth
the change
and if only for the fact that the change
itself is a creative and and and and uh
beneficial thing but once you've done
the change once since you've had it once
and for all I don't think you're any
happier
for having had that Comfort the I think
the only thing that actually makes you
happy is actually creating
but but it's understandable coming from
you but it seems like a narrow
definition of happiness that that a
scientist and an artist could easily
sign on to but many people who can can
still register differences in their
happiness changes in in their well-being
would would not really recognize so for
instance what has happened when you're
going along you're very happy you're as
fulfilled as you've ever been but then
you know your wife dies or your child
dies and now you're not not as happy for
obvious reasons but those reasons aren't
best summarized by a sudden lack of
creativity on your part I I I think they
are I I think that the reason why you're
unhappy is that your the the
um your your previous methods of making
progress in thinking what tied to these
people who have died
and uh you can't just instantly replace
what you would have got from them by
something else and I think you mean by
progress because because this is and I
just said progress I caught your accent
um what do you mean by progress well I
remember I you know I'm I'm not I'm not
um I'm not snobbish about what kinds of
knowledge count as knowledge all all
kinds of not all any kind of state of
mind which one regards as preferable to
another state of mind
can't be reached without creativity and
reaching it is kind of What happiness is
so somebody who who uh doesn't isn't
interested in science and isn't
interested in in art or any of the
things usually regarded as progress or
creativity might still be thinking about
something all it takes is for them to be
a better
person in regard to X after the thought
than before an X might be might be
anything might be something that's
impossible to name it doesn't have a
name because it's not socially valued
but it might be
um you know a particular way of
interacting with the family
um but they would have to be improving
it they would have to be you know
which they think back they they uh would
think yes uh I um I I could have done I
could have done it better and now I am
doing it better
and even if that's you know enacting
Jewish rituals uh uh at anything like
that you can get
anything that you can get into and
improve at by your own standard
takes creativity and that that's what it
takes and lots of people don't do even
that and I think they're in a in a bad
way even if they are saying that they're
not
right right so so then to come back to
the the fundamental disagreement which
has something to do with my Reliance on
fundamentals or my my yeah my hand
waving in the direction of of a
foundation here I may have seemed to be
doing that more than than I was or that
or I mean some of that may be
dispensable for me but so so come to the
my argument about the worst possible
misery for everyone being bad what is
wrong what's wrong with that claim so I
mean just imagine a universe a universe
in which yes anything that can suffer
any conscious system that can exist and
can suffer suffers as much as it
possibly can for as long as it can and
nothing good comes of it they're not
there's no silver line into the
suffering this is just the worst
possible hell
that exists my sense is that
everything so that's one possible state
of the universe
and everything else is better than that
everything everything else is better
than that
yes I I I'm not denying that there's a
um there are objectively better and
worse States and and that's one of the
ones that's objectively worse whether
but that's why we would agree about the
details which well the thing is
different different theories of morality
and different theories of of
human flourishing will disagree about
exactly which is the worst possible
State oh it does um you know well no no
because I I think okay well let's just
so then so then the image for me of
the moral landscape again you can't
download this worst possible State into
me
just by itself without looking at the
details of what is actually happening
any more than you can download Mozart's
happiness oh yeah so I I'll grant you
that so but let's let's just say that so
we have a universe of a a finite number
of beans we'll talk about the worst
possible misery for everyone at time T
which is you know which is obviously
defined by who everyone consists of so
there's all whatever beings are are here
are here and
each is as miserable as he or she or it
can possibly be given the sort of being
it is and given its entanglement with
all other beings so let's we just we
just make this as bad as it can be there
may be some vagaries here where you know
if you make something really really bad
for one being things get a little bit
better for another being given how
they're entangled with each other no no
never mind that never mind Matt yeah
let's just make it you know you know if
there's not one worst possible there are
a finite number of worst possible States
for all these beans to be in yeah and if
we change that if we if we start making
life better for them you know all
together or or even just some of them
that's moving in a Direction
that we will call good and
there is no other way to there so what
I'm what I'm claiming here is that any
Theory you have about goodness
has to entail moving away from that
worst possible misery for everyone it
it's going to be Khan's categorical
imperative it's going to be deontology
if it's going to be religion if it's
going to be consequentialism it's going
to be virtue ethics it's going to be
something that has yet to be invented
it has to recognize that movement that
navigation in this space of possible
experiences away from the worst possible
misery for everyone is what is in fact
the cash value of goodness yeah so once
you're more than a millimeter away from
this worst possible State
um there are lots of ways of getting
better and some of them are better than
others and a lot of you know once you
get as far away from that as we are
uh many things affect
what people
think is is right and wrong good well
what what people think is flourishing
and the worst possible state if it could
exist I'm not sure that it can but if it
could exist if it's if it's Unique or if
there's some equally bad ones uh which
everyone would agree were equally bad
and the worst they have the property
that you can move away from it create um
without creativity because you can
simply download any other state into
those people's brains
um but once you get a certain distance
away and that sort of amount of getting
better isn't worth very much it's it's
um you know it's it's saying okay you're
cured you you know
um you're cured of cancer now you're
happy and and the person isn't because
they were weren't happy before and now
they're back in the state
um they were in and or you know you let
someone out of prison and they go back
to their old life
uh and the the the the the fact that
it's all better than the worst possible
one doesn't actually
resolve disagreements about what is
worse or better well yeah so that but
then that's why my my metaphor of the
the moral landscape seems relevant to me
here because I acknowledge that there
are
there are Peaks and valleys here which
which we may disagree about and and we
and we it may in fact both be right so
for instance there could be an
equivalent Peak
some distance from where we are where
beings just like ourselves could live
very different lives that would strike
us as as morally perverse
then yeah in that case there's an even
better Peak which is better than either
exactly exactly so and and we'll we'll
never Discover it because we are just
are unlucky or we just don't have the
right Minds to discover it we'd have to
change our minds change our brains
since we're general purpose I don't
think that's possible
um well you'd have to augment you'd have
to you'd have to give us more memory and
more processing yeah even all the rest
yeah we already do that routinely right
so but in any case it's just it's just a
contingent fact of the history of the
cosmos that homo sapiens will not
explore this one Peak that could be
explored with with the right technology
and it's it is better it's better in
every in every rational way we could
talk about better and worse than what
we'll just find an even better one and
bypass that one right but yeah and so
this could continually recede so like
some Peaks are well it will never arrive
at the peak right yes or what will seem
to be a peak will recede based on you
know more computational power given to
us yes well I actually I I I I think
that the the real fact is that whenever
we make a great discovery it it creates
more problems so the same is true of
morality uh we we we we get better and
then we find that getting better itself
creates more problems right but like but
they're not problem they're they're more
refined problems you're trying to figure
out whether you should be a vegetarian
not whether you can rape all of yourself
there's also
um you know we've we've abolished war
and therefore we find self-defense more
difficult right right but that but that
those are kind of local
wrinkles based on just how many of us
are still
barbarians or how bad our institutions
are at well that's creating order to our
world I mean we are still Apes
yeah all problems are parochial but I I
think the the fact that that
improvements create new problems is a
universal fact and it'll it'll always be
true so we will a peak will only look
like a peak when we're approaching it
when we're at it we'll see lots of
problems there
right but I but you could imagine how
ethereal
and high class these problems could
become right I mean imagine our
perspective yeah yeah but even from the
perspective of
I mean because certainly certainly
you've been in some state
of high creativity
and high pleasure and very low you know
physical complication
where if that could just endure
for the longest time the kinds of
problems you would be noticing are the
fun problems of which is more beautiful
A or B as opposed to you know I can't
get the Cockroaches out of my kitchen
and I'm driving me crazy
I don't know I mean I I I I I think I'm
agnostic on that one I I I
how for example will there always be
existential problems
I don't know
um I don't know why there should be a
limit on the size of mistake we can make
well that's yeah um that that is a
problem
yeah
um so I I think that there always is
there always is a way we can improve but
we may not take that way but by your own
description we tend to successfully
automate the solutions to these problems
in a way that doesn't require any more
work so that like you you don't have to
you don't have to reinvent clothing you
just buy a new jacket when you need one
and and the problem is solved
yeah but uh you know in in in in a few
billion years time uh we'll have an
existential problem that we have to get
out of the solar system or because the
Sun is going to become a red giant right
and uh who knows what kinds of moral
problems will be raised by presumably
not the problem of who gets to leave
because by that time we'll have very
powerful Machinery but you know I don't
know maybe by that time
there there are whole classes of
severity that will not be known anymore
um but as I said I don't see why that
should be I that how can there be a
limit on the size of mistake we can make
um that that would seem to be an engine
for producing truth which can't exist uh
without creativity so I I don't know I
don't know
um well may that be our biggest problem
yeah yeah yeah
how to escape a red giant in time yeah
it'll take me re-listening to this to to
see where and to what degree I've lost
the thread of our disagreement but I I'm
not sure I think
my summary of our disagreement insofar
as I understand it is that you are
allergic to the concept of there being a
foundation to knowledge Moral Moral or
otherwise and you follow popper in this
line and I basically I think I agree
with you in so far as what you
tend to mean by Foundation except I I
view this claim about
reality exceeding our knowledge which is
to say reality exists whether we know
about it or not and this this includes
possible experiences I feel like that's
the only foundation I need
to get the ball rolling in and and then
I'm happy to have it roll in a paparian
sense of
of it being open-ended kind of endlessly
open-ended and requiring continuous
correction to our theories and the way I
thought about it without really thinking
about popper but I do think about
morality as just a navigation problem
and and just forget about the concept of
moral truth or truth at all we are
conscious systems that are moving in a
space of possible experience and we will
continually discover that some are
better and some are worse some are more
creative some are less so and we're not
wrong to be wanting to move away from
the worst possible misery for everyone
and up some Peak
we'll be changing our opinion of what
constitutes better and worse and we'll
be doing that by the message of reason
right not I think predominantly I think
this is this is maybe an even more
fundamental disagreement between us I
think not predominantly by the methods
of science there's I I so I'm I'm just
looking at a book and that that you see
you quote somebody or other as saying
there couldn't be a science of The Human
Condition and you're very scathing about
that you you you you describe that as
faith in the intrinsic limits of reason
right but I I think it I mean again you
use the word science in a slightly
different way uh but I have I have
um
face if you like in the non-existence of
limits on reason right but and and the
reason that there are limits on science
is is a is a very prosaic reason it's
it's it's not that there's an
impenetrable barrier it's it's just that
prosaically you can't use theories
to address issues that the theories
aren't about
but you you can form theories about the
things that it is about and I mean you
know moral things
you can improve those by the methods of
reason and science is occasionally
relevant but I I don't think it's
fundamentally relevant or especially in
Neuroscience because
Neuroscience has its effect via a
universal machine which which blanks out
all relevance of its details
the fundamental thing there is that yes
that that is my being scathing about
that point about there couldn't be a
science of human nature is really it is
synonymous with with the faith in reason
that I share with you and the fudge
there is that I I do have this more
elastic definition of science yeah and
yeah because I I just view things that
don't I mean I because the again the
boundary but between science and the
rest of reason is not clear and and we
will we'll continue to surmount it in
surprising ways so that's suddenly
something that didn't at all seem open
to science a moment ago is all of a
sudden something that we you know people
in white codes are testing the veracity
of so I mean one example is
I think I use this in the book or
somewhere where the question of you know
is is the Shroud of Turin really a a
relic of of the historical Jesus or not
well that's that's that's a religious
claim it's a claim about history it
doesn't seem like it doesn't seem a
claim about science at all but then all
of a sudden you someone invents the
method of radiocarbon dating and now
it's a claim about chemistry or physics
depending on who's doing the experiment
and I I just noticed that that's that's
continually happening and going to
happen and going to happen even more and
and the direction and it's and it's
unidirectional right it only goes
towards science and never away science
keeps capturing this ground and no
longer and doesn't lose it right so the
the moment you have radiocarbon dating
and you're going to ask whether a piece
of cloth came from a certain period in
history well it's a scientific question
today and it's a scientific question
tomorrow I don't expect science at any
point it's going to say actually we're
no longer during the radiocarbon dating
business
once we're all in the Matrix for example
if we decide to all migrate into a
matrix and and stay there then all
questions about what we should do next
will will not be scientific questions
apart from extending the machine knowing
something right well let's plant a flag
there that is a fascinating topic for a
future conversation obviously the
question about where this is all headed
technologically is is not going away and
it's only going to become more and more
interesting so some podcasts hence I I
think you have to talk about that but I
don't know that
there's no question at all that I could
have written that book better than I did
because it's actually it's actually the
battle arise version of my dissertation
and the reason why the Neuroscience is
in there is because it was a it was a
you know there were there were two two
fmri experiments at the center of that
dissertation which you know we're
connected to my thesis but I totally
take your point there which is that the
neurosciences is is not Central
in principle or in practice to many of
these questions you know but in terms of
understanding
what well-being is at the level of human
beings and and their lives questions
about what is happening in the brain are
potentially always relevant and you know
we can ignore them when when it's easier
to talk about thoughts than it is to
talk about neurotransmitters well then
that's fine but then there the
conversation always can come back to the
details of Neuroscience you know when
relevant
relevant when we're not talking about
something on the universal level uh
um like for example
um how exactly emotions are related to
Sensations
um that's partly a matter of hardware
yeah
um and and how uh Sensations are
interpreted
um especially visual ones that's also
partly a matter of hardware
and there are also surprising
connections so there are things that we
can discover about the brain based on
the rather crude techniques of
neuroimaging as they currently exist
which can lead us to understand
connections that we may have never
noticed on the on the subjective side
one example I use in the book is
it's not the best example because you
could have noticed this subjectively
although not that many people have I
think but there was an experiment done
on on envy and schadenfreude so it was
just he's found that it's people tend to
feel schadenfreude
for people who may Envy right so there's
a connection like they would say and I
could be getting the details slightly
wrong because it's been now years since
I looked at that paper but there was a
neuroimaging experiment that showed a
connection between feeling schadenfreude
for people you know when you see someone
trip on ice and you feel you know this
surge of happiness you will tend to feel
that more for people who you envy so
when you see the rich woman you know you
know Bejeweled with her you know
Christmas shopping bags in both hands
slip on Ice you will feel
a surge of schadenfreude which you might
not have felt for a homeless person
slipping on ice and envy is somehow so
there's a relationship between schadroid
and envy let's just let's just assume
that's a fact about us psychologically
subjectively the common neurological
real estate that that can be found in an
experiment could help us to discover
that about ourselves and there may in
fact be things that you would never
notice subjectively but which are there
to be noticed
which discoveries about the hardware
point you to and actually one example I
think
historically if I'm not mistaken is the
optic blind spot I think that the fact
that we understood the anatomy of the
the retina and that it would dictate a
blind spot is what caused people to
First notice the blind spot subjectively
by closing by Closing one eye and you
know putting a DOT on a piece of paper
and moving it once you realize that the
optic nerve is transiting through the
retina and there's going to be part of
the retina that's not registering any
information that then people went in
search of the the blind spot and found
it I believe that's true but in any case
if you know whether or not it was
historically true it certainly it could
have been true yeah that sort of thing
could be true easily yes yeah
Neuroscience for me is
is relevant in in all of those ways but
for any for the purposes of any
conversation
you know certainly need not be brought
in and May in fact just be complicated
things unnecessarily for for the
purposes of that conversation
yes give you an award for the best
possible blurb that is non-committal and
not obviously denigrating which is the
book achieved its purpose
full stop
that's hilarious that is a big Accolade
no no but it could it could it might
might also be given to mime comp for
some other book oh yeah okay the book
achieved it's highly worthwhile and
necessary perfect I like the book
achievements first it reminds me I I
know someone who who works in Hollywood
who's constantly in the experience of
going to movie screenings and coming out
of them just hoping not to run into the
filmmaker because he hated the film and
and you know this person is a friend or
a colleague and he doesn't know what to
say and how how to Marshal his euphemism
so as not to be totally dishonest but
also not totally insulting and I was
with him at one of these screenings and
I knew he absolutely hated this movie
and we run right into the filmmaker as
we're walking out and he looked
earnestly into the eyes of the filmmaker
and said you must be very proud
okay that's nothing like what I said
well anyway David it's once again it's a
thrill to talk to you and I don't know
if we made progress that anyone can
measure but I certainly feel like I am a
better person every time we talk so
thank you
[Music]
oh
if you enjoyed this podcast there are
several ways you can support it you can
leave reviews on iTunes or Stitcher
wherever you happen to listen to it you
can share it on social media with your
friends you can discuss it on your own
blog or podcast or you can support it
directly at
samharris.org forward slash support